Is this an exorcism of some sort, this book, would you say?
Is it cathartic in some ways?
Yes, I suppose it is.
It is.
It was, uh... First of all, I think I wanted to go back and examine my life in the face of what had happened.
And, um...
Try to work out why it had happened, which is very hard to do.
Try to work out what my part of it was.
It, of course, being... Well, you're talking about just the end of my book.
I've written a autobiography of my entire life.
That's what I'm saying.
You said it.
You're referring to your entire life, I guess.
That's what I'm asking.
Yeah, I'm so sorry.
Yes, yes.
I was not referring to the book.
No, I know.
I know.
And it was cathartic in that the end of my last marriage was very dreadful.
And I think it has been helpful to me to try to write it down and try to make sense of it insofar as anyone can of such a true calamity as it was for me.
Your earlier book was certainly, I guess, a creative autobiography.
It was.
It was subtitled The Education of an Actress, and that's what it was really about.
I had no intention of revealing anything that I didn't want to reveal.
So maybe you can compare the two?
The first book was, my brother says, Bloom Tells Nothing, and the second is Bloom Tells More.
And when you say tell all, what kind of parameters did you establish for yourself?
I didn't.
I just decided, if I was going to do it, that I must be as honest as I possibly could about everything
that has happened to me in my life, otherwise it wouldn't be a true book.
Does it surprise you that most of the interest in the book certainly does focus on the latter pages?
No, it doesn't, because I think those are the strongest pages in the book and the most dramatic.
But it does surprise me the way it's been distorted in that
I have tried to paint a picture of a marriage that in many ways was very wonderful.
And the man I married and loved all those years was one person with whom I had a fruitful, affectionate, most extraordinary relationship.
And there was, you know, another part of him that was deeply destructive in the end.
Do you...
Of course, I've read the book, you know, so I don't mean to question you on things that I've already read.
Well, you have to.
I don't want to be retreaded.
You say that you're, of course, you say very early that all the factors have altered, which you say very early in the book.
Now, this book, when did you actually decide to write this?
I, during the last couple of months,
of my marriage, I wrote down, I wrote, I kept a diary or journal of the confrontations, I don't know what else to call them, with Philip, between Philip and myself, and in the doctor's presence at the Silver Hill Hospital.
So I had the diary, and I knew it was a very strong document.
I had the letters from Burton, which I knew were very unusual.
Nobody knew about my relationship with him.
Yes, they're wonderful letters.
Great credit to you for maintaining your silence.
Silence all these years.
I just felt it was nobody's business.
But at this point of my life, I thought, well, I have known these remarkable men.
And Burton, I knew when he was truly a wonderful young man.
It's time to, if I'm going to do it, to write it.
And I think also it's, maybe we can accuse you of name-dropping here.
Everyone who went to the narrative has an art to play.
I mean, this is some of you that you know.
You talked about Olivier and Chaplin and, you know, these people did play very important arts in my life.
And I wanted, particularly I wanted to write about Chaplin because it had been such a momentous and
you know, remarkable experience for a young actress of 19 to be chosen by him to be his leading lady and to have remained his friend and Una's friend until the end of their lives.
So I knew I had a lot of interesting material in my early childhood, my childhood in the war, etc., my relationship with my mother, mothers and daughters, then followed by mine with my daughter.
There were a lot of parts that I wanted to try to bring together.
There is a theme, I think, that I noted, of insecurity.
Do you acknowledge that, that there is a theme of insecurity?
Oh, yes.
Not only acknowledge it, but I say it very clearly.
And it runs throughout your life, I guess.
Yes.
Mind you, it runs throughout the life of most actors.
It's a very insecure profession to be in.
And I had a very insecure childhood.
I think...
Again, that's something many actresses seem to share, is the missing father.
It's very strange when you read biographies of actresses how many have a father like mine who was, you know, never quite there.
Do you think that this insecurity was a factor in your attraction to Philip?
Oh, no, I was looking for security.
I was looking...
for a strong and stable uh person and in many ways he's that and in many ways he's exactly the diametric opposite of that and of course you were warned repeatedly by mutual friends that uh well only by gore and that was as more as much a joke as anything else no no i wasn't i mean no first of all uh everyone acknowledges his brilliance and his
His seriousness.
And truly, apart from his really rather dreadful relationship with my daughter, though that's something he may see very differently to me, we had a wonderful relationship.
Otherwise it wouldn't be a tragic end.
Do you think you've had enough
Do you think that there was enough distance from it before undertaking the book?
Yes, I do.
I do, because the book took nearly just under three years, really, to write.
And though perhaps I began it in a very emotional way, I did actually chronologically write it.
That is, from my birth to my wherever I am now.
My next question, did you write for a second about the concluding part for it?
No, though, as I say, I had the diary.
I already had that.
No, I didn't.
And that didn't give you, I guess, a degree of distance?
Yes.
I mean, you know, distance.
I'll never be distanced from it in that sense, because it will remain to hurt me for the rest of my life.
That's no question.
But I distanced enough to be able to look at it and try to work out how it could have happened as it did.
Yes.
You say it early on, and then you also quote Richard Burton,
I guess in both cases that it's been a life, a trip worth taking.
In his case particularly, he said it wouldn't have changed today.
How about yourself?
Absolutely a trip worth taking, yes.
And the very same byways?
Who can say?
But, I mean, my relationship with Richard was very passionate and wonderful.
My career has been...
really more than I could have expected.
My marriage to Rod was companionable and very affectionate, and from that marriage I have the most wonderful daughter, the unmentionable, the unmentionable, and my marriage to Philip, or my years with Philip, because we lived together for 15 years and then were married for three, so whatever one wants to call it, relationship or so, gave me
An immense amount, taught me an immense amount.
And it was truly the first and by far the most central relationship I've ever had with a man.
You discussed the power of books and reading.
I've just written my own book and my own books and I'm looking at another one now.
The first one is called The Gentle Madness of Bibliomania.
Yeah.
It was published last year.
Yes.
I actually read about it because I think I have bibliomania to a high degree.
So whenever I see mentions to this passion for books and how it's shaped your life, and then also you discuss, you know, the reading habits in your relationship.
And incidentally, the new book I'm working on, I had a long interview with Harold Bloom, Connecticut, who has
for just what every book that Philip has written is a canon of great levels.
In fact, is that a characterization?
You described the way he almost attacks the text and reads it at an intellectual level that's almost beyond those people that
I'm just interested in that.
I don't actually say that.
I don't say that, but I guess you say he does read differently.
I mean, he's a scrupulous reader.
Yes, I did.
I said he read differently.
I mean, I read for entertainment, or I read to be moved, or I read for information, but he read for life.
He did.
Yes.
But was that a common point?
Oh, it was tremendously attractive, I think, to both of us, that we both loved the same kinds of books and that reading was central to both our lives, yes.
Jumping ahead here.
You mentioned earlier, I guess, here, how do you judge Philip Roth's writing, if you don't mind?
I think he's the most wonderful writer.
I mean, after Bellow, by far the best writer in America.
After he would place Bellow?
Well, he would place Bellow, too.
Is that right?
Yes.
Interesting.
And I think also Harold would say the same thing.
Did you, of course everybody is, when you read some of these, and you sort of have the distortions in that, in some of the pieces, but certainly that whole sequence you read around in that book where you appear as a character, and then you're actually being given a manuscript to read.
Was it his custom to get you his words in progress, surreal?
Yes, at different points, whenever he was ready to.
And this time he didn't.
And this time he didn't?
No.
Have you figured that out in your mind, what that was all about there?
That's got to be the grapes, and they were a lie.
I mean, clearly it seems it was intended to wound.
I don't think it was.
I don't think he realized how much it would wound, but on the other hand, he obviously knew I wouldn't be pleased.
This is why he didn't show it to me.
Yes, yes.
And it was, of course, totally untrue, but it's a novel.
To make matters worse.
Well, it's a novel, but, yes, to make matters worse.
But anyway, that, you know, there it is.
These things happen with writers.
Great.
That's a great book.
It is.
I'm always looking for my lead in these stories, and I'm always looking for what we call the kicker, you know, the final.
You know, at page 15, you say, I'm a survivor.
Here I am.
By the skin of my teeth this time, I must truly say.
You'd say that this was the greatest...
Oh, yes.
This was the worst thing that ever happened to me.
Yes.
And I'm still here.
And tell me a little about your plans.
It's kind of... Of course, you're an actor who's played some great roles of...
It's funny, I expected you to be taller, isn't it?
Everybody does, yes.
Is that just the way they treat you in a film?
No, I think, you know, you see somebody on stage and they're out of proportion to their importance.
You know, everybody does, is that right?
Anyway, I am not.
You asked me something before that.
About your career, what kinds of plans do you have for your career?
What plans do I have?
I've just, I've really been working three years without stopping for one minute.
Between the book, I've done Long Day's Journey, Cherry Orchard, film with Stallone, I've just finished a television in England, and I've done lots of stuff with orchestras and one-man shows.
Yes, but I'm now going to, for the next three months anyway, just calm down a bit, because I am very tired.
Indeed.
You don't seem to be suffering the fate that so many women actors seem to suffer.
I'm not sitting waiting for the phone to ring for some idiot to ask me to do something, no.
And make it myself.
But it does seem to be a sad commentary on so many marvelous performers.
But as they reach a certain age... Well, it's always been the case.
After all, in a way, theater is a lot to do with sex and beauty and youth.
You know, it always has been.
And when that starts to fade, the parts start to fade.
But there are interesting parts.
Shakespeare seemed to respect the minds of his book.
I don't say he doesn't respect the minds, but, I mean, he didn't write very good parts for older women.
That's for sure.
None.
I'm trying to think.
Well, it's Queen Margaret or, you know, the nurse.
No.
That was partly, of course, that the young boys couldn't play older women.
So, I mean, there was another reason for that, I think.
He had, let's see, Henry VIII, he had... Yes, there's Catherine.
That's wonderful.
I've played... That's a wonderful play.
Yes, that is a wonderful play.
It's a pageantist.
Yeah, but it's a wonderful play, much more than that, though.
It really is.
It has all this pageantry there.
Yes.
But the scenes between Woolsey and...
Henry and between Catherine and Henry are really superb.
He came out of retirement, I think, to write that.
We don't really know.
A lot of people say he didn't write it.
I think he collaborated probably with Shakespeare's Apache.
Well, there are some wonderful scenes in it.
I mean, when we did it, we kept saying, this has to be Shakespeare.
Nobody else could have written this.
If that end is pretty ghastly, with the archbishop and that long, long speech, I'd prefer to think somebody else wrote it.
Well, you look at Titus as well.
Yes, well, that's pretty ghastly, too.
Yes, that's true.
I'd love to find out he didn't write that.
Yes, so would I. Maybe you could talk a little bit on the profession of black hair.
Maybe we could get away from the raw questions for a while and how important it is.
Well, it was important, but, I mean, it doesn't exist anymore, because nobody has it.
And I, I mean, I got it by default.
In fact, I got it probably the best way in the way that actors have done through the ages, which is by doing it.
And I did go to
acting schools for two years, one year each.
Couldn't stand them, frankly.
And I, you know, understudied and walked on.
And then I have to say I was catapulted very, very young into the stratosphere and floated around there.
But I, you know, when I was in my early teens, my mother and my brother and I used to go to the Old Vic every Saturday night, sit in the gallery or the upper circle and we saw Olivier and Richardson.
We saw Gielgud at the Haymarket.
We saw all the great actors, and we saw them again and again.
And that's how I, Edith Evans, you know, that's how I... No, I was lucky.
I was lucky.
I really was.
I've never been to a Shakespeare performance in England, but a chance to rectify that.
Is Shakespeare still very popular in England?
Yes.
I mean, the RSC are always doing productions, sometimes not that good,
one's some occasionally good, if the National does some Shakespeare.
And it's, yes, it is being done.
And the best company, really, I think, is the company called Tique by Jowl, which approaches plays in a very novel and interesting... Contemporary?
Mm, very.
I still like something.
I did an interview with John Uptack, a couple of groups, and he said he had heard some plays, and people fear that a generation from now,
Shakespeare may not be performed because the audience would be unable to understand the language.
Do you, I mean, and I... Well, it's never been easy to understand, but if you tune in after about ten minutes, there you are.
Yeah, I say you have to, it's like reading a libretto of an opera before, you should read the text before you go to the play.
You should, actually, yes.
And I know I do, and I read all the plays, and if it's something I haven't read in 15 or 20 years, it behooves you to re-quite yourself with the language and the... Yes.
Nobody's going to be saying behooves in 20 years, though.
That's an easy one or something.
The trouble is that the vocabulary just gets smaller and smaller and smaller.
And I just did a master class, I won't say where, for some students.
It's hard to believe the level of ignorance, actually.
Really?
Digging your interest in what, just in general?
Yeah.
I'm sorry, yeah.
I'm going to have a major chapter in this new book I'm writing.
On the cannon wars, and the dumping down, and the lamentable fact that people aren't reading important books.
Well, and yet you go into Barnes & Noble, for instance, on this Sunday, and it's full of people milling around and looking at books, and it's almost like an entertainment.
Well, it is an entertainment.
It is an entertainment.
I think it's wonderful.
That's nice, but look at the books that they're buying, you know, and they're looking at it.
Yeah, well, generally, yes.
Was there apprehension on your part of what the reaction to this might be?
Yes, because I know I have exposed myself to, well, when you were truly as honest as I was, you have exposed yourself to any kind of criticism.
Yes.
What's the criticism you feared most?
Oh, that the really stupid women, and one or two of them have, would use the word masochistic, which is idiotic, because I'm far from that.
And the relationship with Philip was far from that.
It was an inevitable, I suppose, conclusion, which I didn't see, to a relationship.
It was a very... I was, in a way, afraid of his force, his intellectual force, but so many, many people.
But it was a wonderfully fine relationship with the fine part of him, and a very unfine relationship with the other side of him.
I think for me, as a parent, in the end, it was unforgivable for some of his behavior, too.
Your daughter.
It was not unforgivable, but un-understandable, but inexplicable.
But as I say, Philip may well have, you know, if he wanted to say, he probably would have many reasons for resenting our relationship, my daughter's and mine, which was very close.
And I think perhaps he felt excluded him.
We never meant to.
But stepdaughter, stepfather, step parents, stepchildren relationship was very difficult.
I think one thing that we haven't seen in the notices of your book is how clearly I'm connected I think it is to the way that the relationship developed and ended is the depression that he was having, his own profound emotional problems, which I think you make
very, very clear here.
And I don't think that they've really gotten into that aspect of it at all.
I think it's hard for people to understand.
I've had one or two, more than one, I've had three remarkable letters from women who say that they have been in relationships that were loving, where they loved and were loved, and their husbands became whatever one wants to say Philip was, some kind of a depressed state.
let us say, and turned against them completely and totally as he did me.
And they're still trying to figure out what happened.
One of them is a psychoanalyst, but they're wonderful letters.
And they say that their husband said almost verbatim what mine said to me.
So it's, you know, I choose to think that far from being an evil person, Philip was at that time a very ill person.
And I hope now he's well.
He may well be.
I don't even know.
So that there's been no... You don't even know whether or not he's read the book.
I would assume he's not.
That he would not.
But I know nothing.
He's been very dignified and very quiet.
And there's been no response from mutual... No, I... I don't ask.
A, and B...
A lot of people he hasn't seen for a while.
He's become slightly reclusive, I think.
No, not a peep is the answer.
Interesting.
Of course, he could have made a fuss about your use of some of his letters, I suppose.
I don't use them.
That's right.
No, I'm well within the legal requirements of that.
As long as you don't quote them directly, I guess.
Yes.
No, I wasn't allowed to.
Which is a pity, because some of them were wonderful.
You weren't allowed to by your lawyers?
My lawyers.
Okay, I know I went through that.
Yeah, well, we all know about that.
They sometimes drive you crazy with it.
Well, they were correct.
I mean, I did everything they said.
I was careful.
I didn't want to hurt him anyway.
It's a pity, as I say, because some of his letters were very wonderful.
Would you like at some point to be able to publish them?
Or do you think this is the final word?
No, it's not.
No, I wouldn't publish them.
They're very personal.
Oh, and that's the final word, yes.
And this is the final word.
Yes, it is, yes.
While you were working on the book, did you ever think...
I mean, did you waver out?
Did the pendulum swing back and forth?
Like, I'm not going to do it.
I've got to do it.
I'm not going to do it.
You mean write the book?
Yeah, the book.
At all?
Yeah.
Or delve into these particularly personal things.
It's no point in writing a book.
Yeah.
No, I knew I had to.
I thought it was very hard.
Uh-huh.
And very painful.
And then, of course, at the...
At the very end, all of a sudden, you discover the other woman, a mutual friend.
Yes.
It wasn't even at the end of the book.
It was quite some time after.
I understand, but you mentioned it.
Yes, yes, I did, yes.
You talk about the ultimate wound.
It happens to be somebody that you vote for currently.
Had known for many years.
We're very fond of.
And one wonders if that was meant to wound.
I don't think so, I think.
I've gotten it.
You know, that's mysterious to me.
Yeah.
It's almost like Portnoy to the end in his, uh... No, I, no, we don't want to say that.
No, okay.
It's not so.
Uh, you know, he, I think, was probably very much in love with her.
I have no idea.
You know, that's outside my realm of, I don't know.
But Portnoy, I know, not at all.
I know.
But I hate that.
Okay, and then...
Yeah, excise.
It's excise.
I love that scene, by the way.
I really love that scene where we are visiting with Elizabeth Taylor and Richard, and she brings her home.
You could almost stage that.
Yes, you could.
She's screaming through the thing.
That's wonderful.
Yeah, it was very funny.
And it's done with good taste.
Well, I hope it was done with a bit of humor.
Well, it's probably, you know, one of the true moments of comic relief, I think.
Yes, I must say there are not many.
And you treated the relationship with all these people, I think.
I hope.
I mean, I think there's a bit of comic relief in Brenner.
Page 223, I've written down here, who is the real Philip Ross, I guess.
You don't...it's almost... Well, I think, like all of us, there are many, in his case, perhaps more sharply divided.
After all, he does write about that a great deal.
Especially in Operation Shylock, there were two Philip Roths.
And, as I say, like all of us, we're all very divided, but I think in his case perhaps a little more so.
And that may be the overriding theme of his body's work.
Yes, because there's often the doppelganger of like Alvin Pepler,
You know, there are doppelgangers in most of us, I mean in the Zuckman books, you know.
That's what I was going to say, one after the other as well.
Yes, so he uses that very brilliantly.
But in real life, perhaps it doesn't work out quite as well.
You mentioned how he, did he suffer through bad reviews?
I mean, you mentioned that a
a certain review by John Updike.
Oh, that had the power to hurt, yes, because he admires Updike, so.
And, you know, we all suffer through bad rules, and everyone says they're not going to take notice.
But, of course, everyone does.
It's impossible not to.
They're very wounding.
My book had wonderful reviews, but I got, you know, a nasty comment.
You only remember that.
That's all you remember.
I have a full-page review in the New York Times.
Yes.
compulsory reading for anyone interested in books.
But then a little sentence down here that says, overblown.
Laughing, because it's always, that's what you remember.
Overblown, imperfect, and something, one other thing.
Yes, yes, yes, that's what you remember.
And to this day, I said, overblown?
He's telling me things I should have done.
Yes, no, I know any two of them.
You know, I think it would be an interesting comment, where your whole life, really, has been geared towards performance and the immediate response from an audience, just writing a book.
You know, you labor for three years.
Yes, yes, it's very different.
Not having a clue as to what the performance is.
And then, of course, even then, when it goes out into the world, the reaction starts to trickle in.
And you get terrible surprises.
I mean, there was one review where there were quotations from the book, but completely out of sequence, put in completely different parts of my life.
to build up this portrait that this creature wanted to present of me that was utterly false.
And there's nothing you can do about it.
You just think, well, as Philip always said, you know, you wrap, in three days you wrap a fish in it.
It's true.
But in terms of...
Neil Simon, a couple of weeks ago, in his memoir, he said that, as a playwright, you know the first night if you've got a hit on your hands.
Oh, I'm sure, yes.
And I'm sure that, as an actor, you probably feel the same thing.
Yes, immediately.
Immediately.
And he said, you know, when you're writing a movie, he doesn't have a clue.
Well, there's 22 million people.
For television, it's
And he has no idea who he's writing for.
He's writing a play.
I'm writing for a thousand intelligent people in New York City and a tough audience.
He has that audience in his head.
And he said, you know, the first night, you never know what the critics are going to say.
And do you find that as an actor?
Well, that you know immediately?
Yeah.
Oh, yes.
That it's great.
Oh, you feel success.
You smell it.
You really do.
And that must be, as a writer, it's an entirely different thing.
Yes, of course it is.
Of course it is.
I am an actress.
I've written a book.
I wish I could write others, but I doubt it.
So...
I think I would actually be quite happy not to act anymore if I could do something else.
Really?
Totally, yes.
But there's nothing that I can do on that level.
So you have no plans for any more books then?
No, I haven't.
So this was the book then that you had to write?
It was a book I had to write.
I did.
And are there any areas in retrospect that you wish you had included?
No, maybe one or two.
I wish I'd exclude it.
I needn't have been quite so honest and let myself in for so much.
I remember earlier Kazan told me a few years ago, he said, you know, when you write about yourself, he said, you expose yourself naked to the world.
Terrifying, yes.
And that's the only way to do it, by the way.
Well, that's the only way to do it, and that's why, you know...
When you say, why did I write the last part, or did I question it?
No, I didn't question it, because I knew if I was going to write the book, I had to write the last part.
And then just tell me how you chose the title.
I chose the title.
I had a lot of very highfalutin titles, mostly from the four quartets, which had been mined.
And literally it came to me.
I thought, of course, it's Leaving a Doll's House.
Simple as that.
and obviously refers to the play and to the part that I played around the world, really, but is also the sign of really a woman's regeneration and gaining independence at any age, really, that closing of the door.
And have you, of course the book is,
just out, so maybe it's too early to receive a lot of mail from these, but have you?
Well, I have had these remarkable letters from these women, yes.
And I hope to have them all, because I really very much hoped that I would reach out to women who have been through something similar to what I've been through.
And do you think that that is the intended reader for the book?
No, I think it's
not I mean I would like it to be of interest to the general public and I think it is and people do very nicely say they can't put it down you know and it's a page turner and that's very nice and wonderful but I would like yes I would like to think that there are many many women as we know of my age or around my age who are either widowed or divorced for younger women they were younger women and they're alone and they have to remake their lives I think it might give them a little bit
more courage to know that whatever my position might seem to be i've had to do exactly the same thing i'm trying to do it you know nowhere in the book do you say you feel used i think it's an important thing this is not no i think that's important to point out this is not a whining complaining oh no it wasn't used by him in any way some people might
feel that, I think, from the fragmentary press accounts.
Oh, well, but they've been really... No, not from reading the book.
No, no, not from reading the book.
The press accounts have been, some have been very kind, and some have been very intelligent, and some have been unutterably false and stupid, and especially the ones that headline, you know, about Claire's complaint, or
Isn't that right?
You know, yes.
Oh, a lot of that kind of stuff.
A marriage to Portnoy.
I mean, absolute crap, frankly.
And a marriage made in hell.
And it wasn't that at all.
And anyone has to only read the book to see that I say what a wonderful, what wonderful years we had together.
So I have resented that terribly, yes.
And even very recently he has expressed some
desire for a rapprochement, but... No.
I mean, you mentioned that at the end.
Well, this is nearly two years ago.
That's 1994, yeah.
Yes, yes.
But that's definitely, that was not in the equation, obviously, at all at that point, and for yourself.
I, for a long time, certainly for a year after I split,
It was possible for me, but it was obviously not something he wanted.
Because I had to take the attitude that what he had said to me was said through illness.
And I thought that there would be a morning when he would wake up and say, oh my God, what have I done?
I've lost a very precious relationship, but that never happened.
Okay.
I think that...
How are we doing?
With pleasure.